README.md, before:

# MNV-17

[**中文版本**](#中文版本) | [**English Version**](#english-version)

---

## 中文版本

### MNV-17：非语言发声识别

本仓库展示了在 [MNV-17 数据集](https://huggingface.co/datasets/maimai11/MNV_17) 上微调的 Qwen2.5-Omni 模型在非语言发声（NV）ASR识别任务上的卓越表现。同时提供了Qwen2.5-Omni和Qwen2-Audio的推理脚本。

**[点击这里体验可播放的音频演示](https://yongaifadian1.github.io/MNV-17/)**

### 关键发现

#### 未见说话人泛化能力

**重要说明**: 所有演示样本的说话人在训练过程中完全未见。

这证明了模型学会了**通用的NV发声规律**，而非仅仅拟合特定说话人的发声习惯，展现了优秀的跨说话人泛化能力。

### 模型性能

根据我们的[论文](https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.18196)实验结果：

| 模型 Model | 联合CER | NV识别准确率 |
|------------|---------|-------------|
| **Qwen2.5-Omni** | **3.60%** | **57.29%** |
| Qwen2-Audio | 4.84% | 56.28% |
| SenseVoice | 8.71% | 57.29% |
| Paraformer | 5.70% | 28.64% |

#### 性能亮点

1. **最低联合错误率**: Qwen2.5-Omni 实现了 3.60% 的联合字符错误率，在 ASR 和 NV 识别双重任务中表现最佳。
2. **卓越NV识别**: 在严格的完全匹配评估下达到 57.29% 准确率（类型、数量、顺序完全匹配）。


### 数据集特点

#### MNV-17 数据集优势

1. **表演式录制**: 避免了自然语音中NV的模糊性，确保高质量标注。
2. **类别平衡**: 17个NV类别分布均衡（最大最小比例仅2.7）。
3. **说话人多样性**: 49名来自不同地区的中文母语者。
4. **语境丰富**: NV自然嵌入在语义丰富的句子中。

#### 设计创新

- **脚本化方法**: 使用LLM生成自然语境，确保NV的语义合理性。
- **多NV组合**: 支持1-3个NV的随机组合，模拟真实场景。
- **说话人独立划分**: 严格的训练/验证/测试集划分，确保泛化评估。

### 快速开始

#### 环境配置

```bash
# 安装依赖
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

#### 推理测试

本仓库提供了两个模型的推理脚本，以Qwen2.5-Omni为例：



```bash
cd examples/qwen2.5omni
bash run_qwen25omni.sh
```

默认参数：
- 基础模型：`Qwen/Qwen2.5-Omni-7B`（支持自动从 ModelScope/HuggingFace 下载）
- LoRA 权重：`../../ckpt/qwen25-omni-7b-finetuned/v0-20250914-150113/checkpoint-192`（需从链接下载）
- 测试数据：`../testset/test.jsonl`



#### 自定义参数

您可以直接编辑 shell 脚本或运行时传入参数：

```bash
python inference.py \
    --base_model "your/model/path" \
    --checkpoint "your/lora/path" \
    --test_file "your/test/file.jsonl" \
    --output_file "output.jsonl" \
    --num_samples 50 \
    --gpu_id "0"
```

### 相关链接

- 📄 **论文**: [MNV-17: A High-Quality Performative Mandarin Dataset for Nonverbal Vocalization Recognition in Speech](https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.18196)
- 🤗 **数据集**: [maimai11/MNV_17](https://huggingface.co/datasets/maimai11/MNV_17)
- 🤖 **微调模型**: [Qwen2.5-Omni-7B-MNV17](https://huggingface.co/kiiic/MNV-17-Qwen-fintune)

### 引用

如果您使用了本数据集或相关工作，请引用：

```bibtex
@misc{mai2025mnv17highqualityperformativemandarin,
      title={MNV-17: A High-Quality Performative Mandarin Dataset for Nonverbal Vocalization Recognition in Speech},
      author={Jialong Mai and Jinxin Ji and Xiaofen Xing and Chen Yang and Weidong Chen and Jingyuan Xing and Xiangmin Xu},
      year={2025},
      eprint={2509.18196},
      archivePrefix={arXiv},
      primaryClass={cs.SD},
      url={https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.18196}
}
```

### 主要贡献

1. **高质量数据集**: MNV-17提供了目前类别最全面的中文非语言发声数据集。
2. **泛化能力验证**: 证明了基于表演式数据的模型具有优秀的跨说话人泛化能力。
3. **协同效应**: 证明NV识别能力在多任务训练下的语音模型中不会损害ASR性能。
4. **基准建立**: 为NV感知ASR建立了标准评估基准。

---

**作者**: Jialong Mai, Jinxin Ji, Xiaofen Xing, Chen Yang, Weidong Chen, Jingyuan Xing, Xiangmin Xu

**机构**: 华南理工大学, 香港理工大学, 同济大学, 上海交通大学, 香港中文大学, 佛山大学

---

## English Version

### MNV-17: Nonverbal Vocalization Recognition

This repository demonstrates the excellent performance of Qwen2.5-Omni and Qwen2-Audio models fine-tuned on the [MNV-17 dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/maimai11/MNV_17) for Nonverbal Vocalization (NV) ASR recognition tasks. It also provides inference scripts for Qwen2.5-Omni and Qwen2-Audio.

**[Click here for interactive audio demo](https://yongaifadian1.github.io/MNV-17/)**

### Key Findings

#### Unseen Speaker Generalization

**Crucial Note**: All demo samples are from speakers who were completely unseen during training.

This demonstrates that the model learned **universal NV vocalization patterns** rather than merely fitting specific speakers' habits, showcasing excellent cross-speaker generalization.

### Model Performance

According to our [paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.18196) experimental results:

| Model | Joint CER | NV Recognition Accuracy |
|-------|-----------|------------------------|
| **Qwen2.5-Omni** | **3.60%** | **57.29%** |
| Qwen2-Audio | 4.84% | 56.28% |
| SenseVoice | 8.71% | 57.29% |
| Paraformer | 5.70% | 28.64% |

#### Performance Highlights

1. **Lowest Joint Error Rate**: Qwen2.5-Omni achieved 3.60% joint CER, best performance in dual ASR and NV recognition tasks.
2. **Excellent NV Recognition**: 57.29% accuracy under strict exact-match evaluation (type, count, order must all match).


### Dataset Characteristics

#### MNV-17 Dataset Advantages

1. **Performative Recording**: Avoids ambiguity of NVs in spontaneous speech, ensures high-quality annotation.
2. **Class Balance**: 17 NV categories with balanced distribution (max/min ratio only 2.7).
3. **Speaker Diversity**: 49 native Mandarin speakers from various regions.
4. **Rich Context**: NVs naturally embedded in semantically rich sentences.

#### Design Innovation

- **Scripted Approach**: LLM-generated natural contexts ensure semantic reasonableness of NVs.
- **Multi-NV Combinations**: Supports random combinations of 1-3 NVs, simulating real scenarios.
- **Speaker-Independent Split**: Strict train/validation/test division ensures generalization evaluation.

### Quick Start

#### Environment Setup

```bash
# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

#### Inference Testing

This repository provides inference scripts for two models, Qwen2.5-Omni as an example:



```bash
cd examples/qwen2.5omni
bash run_qwen25omni.sh
```

Default parameters:
- Base model: `Qwen/Qwen2.5-Omni-7B` (supports auto-download from ModelScope/HuggingFace)
- LoRA weights: `../../ckpt/qwen25-omni-7b-finetuned/v0-20250914-150113/checkpoint-192` (need to download from link)
- Test data: `../testset/test.jsonl` 




#### Custom Parameters

You can edit the shell scripts directly or pass parameters at runtime:

```bash
python inference.py \
    --base_model "your/model/path" \
    --checkpoint "your/lora/path" \
    --test_file "your/test/file.jsonl" \
    --output_file "output.jsonl" \
    --num_samples 50 \
    --gpu_id "0"

```

### Related Links

- 📄 **Paper**: [MNV-17: A High-Quality Performative Mandarin Dataset for Nonverbal Vocalization Recognition in Speech](https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.18196)
- 🤗 **Dataset**: [maimai11/MNV_17](https://huggingface.co/datasets/maimai11/MNV_17)
- 🤖 **Fine-tuned Model**: [MNV17](https://huggingface.co/kiiic/MNV-17-Qwen-fintune)

### Citation

If you use this dataset or related work, please cite:

```bibtex
@misc{mai2025mnv17highqualityperformativemandarin,
      title={MNV-17: A High-Quality Performative Mandarin Dataset for Nonverbal Vocalization Recognition in Speech},
      author={Jialong Mai and Jinxin Ji and Xiaofen Xing and Chen Yang and Weidong Chen and Jingyuan Xing and Xiangmin Xu},
      year={2025},
      eprint={2509.18196},
      archivePrefix={arXiv},
      primaryClass={cs.SD},
      url={https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.18196}
}
```

### Key Contributions

1. **High-Quality Dataset**: MNV-17 provides the most comprehensive Chinese nonverbal vocalization dataset.
2. **Generalization Verification**: Proves excellent cross-speaker generalization of performative data-based models.
3. **Synergy Discovery**: Proves NV recognition can enhance rather than harm ASR performance.
4. **Benchmark Establishment**: Establishes standard evaluation benchmark for NV-aware ASR.

---

**Authors**: Jialong Mai, Jinxin Ji, Xiaofen Xing, Chen Yang, Weidong Chen, Jingyuan Xing, Xiangmin Xu

**Institutions**: South China University of Technology, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Tongji University, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Foshan University

Commit message:

Document OOD and cross-language generalization demos

README.md, after:

# MNV-17

[**中文版本**](#中文版本) | [**English Version**](#english-version)

---

## 中文版本

### MNV-17：非语言发声识别

本仓库展示了在 [MNV-17 数据集](https://huggingface.co/datasets/maimai11/MNV_17) 上微调的 Qwen2.5-Omni 模型在非语言发声（NV）ASR识别任务上的卓越表现。同时提供了Qwen2.5-Omni和Qwen2-Audio的推理脚本。

**[点击这里体验可播放的音频演示](https://yongaifadian1.github.io/MNV-17/)**

### 关键发现

#### 未见说话人泛化能力

**重要说明**: 所有演示样本的说话人在训练过程中完全未见。

这证明了模型学会了**通用的NV发声规律**，而非仅仅拟合特定说话人的发声习惯，展现了优秀的跨说话人泛化能力。

#### 域外与跨语种泛化

我们新增了 `audio_samples/out_of_domain/` 与 `audio_samples/cross_language/` 两组示例，展示在 MNV-17 上微调的 Qwen2.5-Omni 还能：

1. **域外泛化**：在环境噪声、叙事风格等均与训练语料不同的样本上保持稳定输出。
2. **跨语种泛化**：在中英夹杂乃至纯英文的语音里正确插入非语言标签，说明模型并不依赖特定语种语境。

> 示例音频可直接在顶端 Demo 页面中播放，或从 `audio_samples/out_of_domain` 与 `audio_samples/cross_language` 文件夹中找到对应 wav。

### 模型性能

根据我们的[论文](https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.18196)实验结果：

| 模型 Model | 联合CER | NV识别准确率 |
|------------|---------|-------------|
| **Qwen2.5-Omni** | **3.60%** | **57.29%** |
| Qwen2-Audio | 4.84% | 56.28% |
| SenseVoice | 8.71% | 57.29% |
| Paraformer | 5.70% | 28.64% |

#### 性能亮点

1. **最低联合错误率**: Qwen2.5-Omni 实现了 3.60% 的联合字符错误率，在 ASR 和 NV 识别双重任务中表现最佳。
2. **卓越NV识别**: 在严格的完全匹配评估下达到 57.29% 准确率（类型、数量、顺序完全匹配）。


### 数据集特点

#### MNV-17 数据集优势

1. **表演式录制**: 避免了自然语音中NV的模糊性，确保高质量标注。
2. **类别平衡**: 17个NV类别分布均衡（最大最小比例仅2.7）。
3. **说话人多样性**: 49名来自不同地区的中文母语者。
4. **语境丰富**: NV自然嵌入在语义丰富的句子中。

#### 设计创新

- **脚本化方法**: 使用LLM生成自然语境，确保NV的语义合理性。
- **多NV组合**: 支持1-3个NV的随机组合，模拟真实场景。
- **说话人独立划分**: 严格的训练/验证/测试集划分，确保泛化评估。

### 快速开始

#### 环境配置

```bash
# 安装依赖
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

#### 推理测试

本仓库提供了两个模型的推理脚本，以Qwen2.5-Omni为例：



```bash
cd examples/qwen2.5omni
bash run_qwen25omni.sh
```

默认参数：
- 基础模型：`Qwen/Qwen2.5-Omni-7B`（支持自动从 ModelScope/HuggingFace 下载）
- LoRA 权重：`../../ckpt/qwen25-omni-7b-finetuned/v0-20250914-150113/checkpoint-192`（需从链接下载）
- 测试数据：`../testset/test.jsonl`



#### 自定义参数

您可以直接编辑 shell 脚本或运行时传入参数：

```bash
python inference.py \
    --base_model "your/model/path" \
    --checkpoint "your/lora/path" \
    --test_file "your/test/file.jsonl" \
    --output_file "output.jsonl" \
    --num_samples 50 \
    --gpu_id "0"
```

### 相关链接

- 📄 **论文**: [MNV-17: A High-Quality Performative Mandarin Dataset for Nonverbal Vocalization Recognition in Speech](https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.18196)
- 🤗 **数据集**: [maimai11/MNV_17](https://huggingface.co/datasets/maimai11/MNV_17)
- 🤖 **微调模型**: [Qwen2.5-Omni-7B-MNV17](https://huggingface.co/kiiic/MNV-17-Qwen-fintune)

### 引用

如果您使用了本数据集或相关工作，请引用：

```bibtex
@misc{mai2025mnv17highqualityperformativemandarin,
      title={MNV-17: A High-Quality Performative Mandarin Dataset for Nonverbal Vocalization Recognition in Speech},
      author={Jialong Mai and Jinxin Ji and Xiaofen Xing and Chen Yang and Weidong Chen and Jingyuan Xing and Xiangmin Xu},
      year={2025},
      eprint={2509.18196},
      archivePrefix={arXiv},
      primaryClass={cs.SD},
      url={https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.18196}
}
```

### 主要贡献

1. **高质量数据集**: MNV-17提供了目前类别最全面的中文非语言发声数据集。
2. **泛化能力验证**: 证明了基于表演式数据的模型具有优秀的跨说话人泛化能力。
3. **协同效应**: 证明NV识别能力在多任务训练下的语音模型中不会损害ASR性能。
4. **基准建立**: 为NV感知ASR建立了标准评估基准。

---

**作者**: Jialong Mai, Jinxin Ji, Xiaofen Xing, Chen Yang, Weidong Chen, Jingyuan Xing, Xiangmin Xu

**机构**: 华南理工大学, 香港理工大学, 同济大学, 上海交通大学, 香港中文大学, 佛山大学

---

## English Version

### MNV-17: Nonverbal Vocalization Recognition

This repository demonstrates the excellent performance of Qwen2.5-Omni and Qwen2-Audio models fine-tuned on the [MNV-17 dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/maimai11/MNV_17) for Nonverbal Vocalization (NV) ASR recognition tasks. It also provides inference scripts for Qwen2.5-Omni and Qwen2-Audio.

**[Click here for interactive audio demo](https://yongaifadian1.github.io/MNV-17/)**

### Key Findings

#### Unseen Speaker Generalization

**Crucial Note**: All demo samples are from speakers who were completely unseen during training.

This demonstrates that the model learned **universal NV vocalization patterns** rather than merely fitting specific speakers' habits, showcasing excellent cross-speaker generalization.

#### Out-of-Domain & Cross-Language Generalization

Two new folders, `audio_samples/out_of_domain/` and `audio_samples/cross_language/`, provide evidence that the Qwen2.5-Omni fine-tuned on MNV-17:

1. **Handles domain shift**: Remains robust when background noise, storytelling style, and acoustic conditions differ from the training corpus.
2. **Transfers across languages**: Inserts the right NV tags even in mixed Mandarin-English or fully English utterances.

> All clips are playable on the Demo page (link above) and reside locally under the two folders for offline inspection.

### Model Performance

According to our [paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.18196) experimental results:

| Model | Joint CER | NV Recognition Accuracy |
|-------|-----------|------------------------|
| **Qwen2.5-Omni** | **3.60%** | **57.29%** |
| Qwen2-Audio | 4.84% | 56.28% |
| SenseVoice | 8.71% | 57.29% |
| Paraformer | 5.70% | 28.64% |

#### Performance Highlights

1. **Lowest Joint Error Rate**: Qwen2.5-Omni achieved 3.60% joint CER, best performance in dual ASR and NV recognition tasks.
2. **Excellent NV Recognition**: 57.29% accuracy under strict exact-match evaluation (type, count, order must all match).


### Dataset Characteristics

#### MNV-17 Dataset Advantages

1. **Performative Recording**: Avoids ambiguity of NVs in spontaneous speech, ensures high-quality annotation.
2. **Class Balance**: 17 NV categories with balanced distribution (max/min ratio only 2.7).
3. **Speaker Diversity**: 49 native Mandarin speakers from various regions.
4. **Rich Context**: NVs naturally embedded in semantically rich sentences.

#### Design Innovation

- **Scripted Approach**: LLM-generated natural contexts ensure semantic reasonableness of NVs.
- **Multi-NV Combinations**: Supports random combinations of 1-3 NVs, simulating real scenarios.
- **Speaker-Independent Split**: Strict train/validation/test division ensures generalization evaluation.

### Quick Start

#### Environment Setup

```bash
# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

#### Inference Testing

This repository provides inference scripts for two models, Qwen2.5-Omni as an example:



```bash
cd examples/qwen2.5omni
bash run_qwen25omni.sh
```

Default parameters:
- Base model: `Qwen/Qwen2.5-Omni-7B` (supports auto-download from ModelScope/HuggingFace)
- LoRA weights: `../../ckpt/qwen25-omni-7b-finetuned/v0-20250914-150113/checkpoint-192` (need to download from link)
- Test data: `../testset/test.jsonl` 




#### Custom Parameters

You can edit the shell scripts directly or pass parameters at runtime:

```bash
python inference.py \
    --base_model "your/model/path" \
    --checkpoint "your/lora/path" \
    --test_file "your/test/file.jsonl" \
    --output_file "output.jsonl" \
    --num_samples 50 \
    --gpu_id "0"

```

### Related Links

- 📄 **Paper**: [MNV-17: A High-Quality Performative Mandarin Dataset for Nonverbal Vocalization Recognition in Speech](https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.18196)
- 🤗 **Dataset**: [maimai11/MNV_17](https://huggingface.co/datasets/maimai11/MNV_17)
- 🤖 **Fine-tuned Model**: [MNV17](https://huggingface.co/kiiic/MNV-17-Qwen-fintune)

### Citation

If you use this dataset or related work, please cite:

```bibtex
@misc{mai2025mnv17highqualityperformativemandarin,
      title={MNV-17: A High-Quality Performative Mandarin Dataset for Nonverbal Vocalization Recognition in Speech},
      author={Jialong Mai and Jinxin Ji and Xiaofen Xing and Chen Yang and Weidong Chen and Jingyuan Xing and Xiangmin Xu},
      year={2025},
      eprint={2509.18196},
      archivePrefix={arXiv},
      primaryClass={cs.SD},
      url={https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.18196}
}
```

### Key Contributions

1. **High-Quality Dataset**: MNV-17 provides the most comprehensive Chinese nonverbal vocalization dataset.
2. **Generalization Verification**: Proves excellent cross-speaker generalization of performative data-based models.
3. **Synergy Discovery**: Proves NV recognition can enhance rather than harm ASR performance.
4. **Benchmark Establishment**: Establishes standard evaluation benchmark for NV-aware ASR.

---

**Authors**: Jialong Mai, Jinxin Ji, Xiaofen Xing, Chen Yang, Weidong Chen, Jingyuan Xing, Xiangmin Xu

**Institutions**: South China University of Technology, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Tongji University, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Foshan University
